Abstract
Cortical neurons are often functionally heterogeneous even for molecularly defined subtypes. In sensory cortices, physiological responses to natural stimuli can be sparse and vary widely even for neighboring neurons. It is thus difficult to parse out circuits that encode specific stimuli for further experimentation. Here, we report the development of a Cre-reporter mouse that allows recombination for cellular labeling and genetic manipulation, and use it with an activity-dependent Fos-CreERT2 driver to identify functionally active circuits in the auditory cortex. In vivo targeted patch recordings validate our method for neurons responding to physiologically relevant natural sounds such as pup wriggling calls and ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs). Using this system to investigate cortical responses in postpartum mothers, we find a transient recruitment of neurons highly responsive to USVs. This subpopulation of neurons has distinct physiological properties that improve the coding efficiency for pup USV calls, implicating it as a unique signature in parental plasticity.

Introduction
The primary auditory cortex (A1) is the first cortical station encoding sound information. Unlike at the periphery (e.g., the cochlear nucleus), which primarily deconstructs sounds based on their spectral content, neuronal responses in A1, which is only a few synapses away, are often idiosyncratic. A1 responses are sparse, highly sensitive to modulation in time (amplitude modulation, frequency modulation, harmonics, context) and their coding principles are not fully understood1. Concurrently, it has been shown that A1 neurons encode features of auditory objects that are common in natural sounds2. A major challenge in auditory neuroscience is to understand cortical responses to different natural sounds, which are not perceived nor processed as a linear sum of pure tones3,4.

Many animals across the animal kingdom (e.g., insects, birds, whales, bats, rodents and primates) use vocalizations to communicate with other individuals in their natural environment. Here, we focus our study on cortical coding and plasticity of mouse vocalizations, which have complex spectro-temporal structure5. Studying these complex sounds may provide insight into cortical coding of high-dimensional sound features6. Specifically, we focus on newborn pup vocalizations to track a natural form of plasticity during motherhood when these sounds bear special behavioral relevance7,8.

Upon becoming mothers, female mice show an array of maternal behaviors, all of which are geared towards the caring of pups. In rodents, specific sets of sounds emitted by pups elicit specific maternal behaviors9. Two such sounds are wriggling calls (WCs) and ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs). Pup USVs are emitted as cries of help when pups are out of the nest and WCs are emitted while pups struggle to reach the mother’s nipples during suckling. Several plastic changes have been described in A1 neurons of mothers, particularly in neurons responding to USVs. These include, but are not limited to, enhanced and more reliable single neuron responses to USVs10,11,12,13. However, the emergent circuit properties within the mother’s auditory cortex and the brain as a whole during the postpartum period remain largely unknown14.

Traditionally, studying cortical representation of sounds involves blind electrophysiological recording15,16 or, more recently, Ca2+ imaging17,18. Notably, even when cells are targeted for recording by “cell type” markers defined by Cre lines, the neurons recorded can still be highly heterogeneous19,20. We took a new approach to study neurons encoding natural sounds in the auditory cortex, in which we isolate active neurons based on the expression of the immediate early gene (IEG) Fos21. Different Fos-based methods have been developed to tag active neurons using transgenic or knock-in mice22,23,24. We recently developed a Fos-CreERT2 knock-in mouse25, which utilizes the promoter of Fos to drive the transcription of CreER in activated neurons. This TRAP (Targeted Recombination in Active Populations) driver mouse allows temporally controlled recombination in active neurons within ~6 h around the time of a 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) injection, which causes nuclear translocation of CreER, leading to the permanent expression of a Cre reporter. While exhibiting several advantages over other methods, TRAP may have significant levels of stochastic baseline noise (false positives). Indeed, despite the extensive use of IEG-based methods, the direct relationship between IEG expression and distinct firing properties of neurons has only rarely been tested26. Taking advantage of the ability of TRAP to tag and follow live neurons after recombination, we directly assessed its efficiency by recording the physiological response profiles of the recombined neurons in a complex neural network, in vivo. Additionally, we describe a new Cre-reporter mouse strain for general use and optimize its performance with the TRAP driver for targeting active neurons in the auditory cortex. We then exploit these methods to reveal coding properties of cortical neurons that are particularly responsive to natural sounds in both naive mice and following maternal plasticity.